Mental models are powerful. Some of the
most successful people in the world
swear by mental models. Mental models
are basically simplified representations
of how the world works. You take
something really complicated, you
simplify it into a framework that you
can then use for decision-m and problem
solving. For example, a mental model
that I really love around decision-m is
the expected value model. This model
says that instead of thinking about
decisions as being either good or bad
decisions, you think about each decision
as having a set of positive and negative
consequences. That we should make
decisions that give us a repeated high
probability of winning on average over
the long term rather than just oneoff. I
think this is a great mental model. I
use it all the time. I teach the
professionals that I work with. It's
such a useful model that it's become
standard in a lot of fields revolving
around decision-making and probability
like trading and finance and
professional poker even. So, in this
video, I'm going to share with you six
of my favorite mental models. But these
aren't just regular models. These six
are very special mental models. In fact,
one of my favorite books of all time is
probably this one. It's 50 models for
strategic thinking. But here's the thing
that I've observed after teaching mental
models to so many people. What I've
realized is that mental models are not
enough. Regardless of the actual model
that you use, the way that you apply
your context and knowledge and situation
to the model can make or break how
effective it is. For example, I
previously worked with this data
scientist for this large e-commerce
business and they were trying to make a
decision about which email campaign to
use. And so by looking at the past data,
he estimated the probability of making a
certain amount of money for each
campaign and decided that campaign A is
the one that has the higher probability
of delivering higher profit than
campaign B. So they went with campaign
A. They lost a lot of money. The issue
wasn't just luck. The issue was that the
past data that he was looking at was in
the holiday season and the way that that
campaign performs in the holiday season
was very different to how it performs in
the off season. So even though he was
applying this expected value model, he
just missed an entire factor, an entire
variable that would have changed his
equation completely. This is actually
the reason why he reached out to me in
the first place because it seemed like
an impossible problem. How do you know
what you don't know? Yes, you've got a
model. Yes, you have your knowledge. How
do you know you're applying the model in
the right way and you don't have gaps
and blind spots? And so, this aspect is
what I want to focus on in today's
video. The six mental models I'm going
to give you are not just regular models
because they're what I call meta
models.
They are the mental models that you
should apply whenever you use any other
form of mental model. And the first meta
model is called nonlinearity.
In the example I gave before with that
data scientist, the mistake he
fundamentally made was that he believed
that a certain campaign, so let's say
this campaign is called A leads to a
certain level of profit or a certain
level of result whereas campaign B led
to a different kind of result. And so
this is an example of linear logic or
linear thinking where we say A leads to
result number one and B leads to result
number two. But in real life
relationships and logic is rarely
linear. In real life it's not like this.
It's more like A and B uh influence each
other in the presence of C under the
condition of D which also relates to E.
And all of these things combined when
going through F leads to a certain type
of result. And so there is this uh
incentive for our brain for the human
brain to try to find simplicity to find
the the easiest way to understand
something. And it's very tempting to see
relationships and logic as linear. But
if this is the true nature of a
relationship or a logic or how things
actually work, then any attempt to turn
this into something that's linear is
actually going to be incorrect. And so
the meta model of nonlinearity means
that by default you should assume that
relationships are not onetoone and
linear. You should assume that anything
that is complex and multiffactorial is
nonlinear. And what that means is that
when you're thinking about the decision
or the problem, you actually want to
catch yourself on linear thinking. So
this is your your takeaway.
First of all, detect and be wary of
linear
thinking patterns.
As you're thinking through a problem or
a decision to make, if you notice that
you're thinking in a very linear way
where there's a onetoone relationship,
if I do this, it will lead to this.
Whereas, if I do this, it will lead to
this. If I want to achieve a certain
result, I need to make sure I do this
and then I do this and then I do this
and then I do this. That kind of pattern
of thinking is very fixed, rigid, and
most likely inaccurate. So, catch
yourself when you're thinking in this
way and challenge yourself to think more
nonlinearly. A great exercise for this
is to actually try to map out the
relationships
between
the different factors or the different
variables as part of your problem or
your decision. So a complicated decision
or complicated problem is not
complicated because the universe deems
it so. It's because in order to achieve
a certain result, there are so many
different factors and these factors all
relate to each other. It's this
complicated web of interactions that
makes something complicated or difficult
in the first place. And so what some
people will try to do is they'll say,
well, it's so difficult to think about
this. If I still want to achieve this
result, the easier way is to just not
think about this at all and instead
oversimplify it with linear thinking.
That is not going to be effective for
guaranteeing your result, obviously. And
if you fall into this trap, then of all
the hundreds of different mental models
that you could be using to solve a
problem, you're not going to know which
one is the most appropriate for this.
You're going to think, "Hey, because
I've simplified this issue, I can use
this mental model and that gives me a
nice clean result that I can feel good
about." But maybe if you thought deeper
about the problem, you'd realize that
that mental model doesn't actually make
sense in this context or it's it's being
applied too forcibly. Maybe there's
another model that you can use instead.
Again, the mental model is there as a
tool to help you to make this decision
and to simplify something that's really
complicated. But in order for that model
to give us a useful output, it depends
on the input we think is relevant to
give it. So the activity of actually
deliberately sitting there and mapping
out all the different variables that we
think create this complexity is an
excellent exercise. So when you try to
map out these relationships, the first
step is just to list out every variable
that you think just literally dump them.
Dump them out. list out every factor and
variable that you think could be useful
and relevant in thinking about this
problem. And then you just go through
this list and try to see how these
things influence each other, how they're
connected. So in that marketing campaign
example, maybe we've got some words like
uh the type of audience,
the timing or the seasonality of the
campaign, the different channels of
distribution, the actual content of the
campaign itself, the offer and the
perceived value of the campaign, the
size of the audience.
Okay, whereas this is like audience like
demographics, maybe even like data
attribution in terms of how good your
data tracking is and how reliable your
data is. So this might be a bunch of
different words to represent the factors
that make a decision about which
campaign is going to be more profitable.
And so as we look at this, there are
lots of possible relationships like
okay, well we know that the audience
demographic resonates with a particular
type of offer. But then also we know
that the the timing and the seasonality
also influences the perceived value of
that offer. And also we know that the
the the content of the campaign itself
is going to frame that offer in a
certain way. And the content obviously
is depends on the timing and the
seasonality. And this audience also
exists within a certain type of channel.
Like some people might be on emails
whereas some people might be on Tik Tok
versus some people might be on Facebook
in terms of how profitable this entire
thing actually is, which is the the
point of this campaign. Well, that's
also going to depend on the audience
total size as well as well as the you
know the quality of that audience and
how much money that they have to spend.
So this is just a very simple example
just to show you you know this you can
see that there's lots of different other
ways that you could have arranged this.
This is just one example. But then as
you go through this uh just by going
through this process of thinking about
what's important and how it all relates
together and uh what are the factors
that influence the profitability you
know we might realize hey we've actually
completely forgotten about an entire
variable which is you know the cost to
run the campaign you know
and then as soon as we add this
additional word of cost in we might
think okay well now that that also makes
a difference because different channels
have different costs and different
audience demographics are more costly.
to market to. And so we're now seeing
the complexity of this decision. And
when we get to so many arrows going
everywhere, what happens is that we look
at all of this and we say, okay, this is
the result that we want. And this is all
the stuff that makes it complicated.
So the solution here is not to say,
well, let's just ignore all of this
because it's too hard to think about.
It's to go through the process of trying
to think about it so that we can gain
more clarity and organization about this
complex thing. Because as we think more
about the complicated part, it helps us
unwrap this
and over time it becomes easier and more
intuitive for us to understand and that
is what contributes to the problem being
actually solved and getting the result
that we want. And the reason I recommend
doing this mapping activity as a key
takeaway to actually try to challenge
yourself to do this and to feel that
complexity and feel that mental burden
is because if you're trying to make a
complex decision or solving a complex
problem and you don't see how the pieces
fit together, you are going to have to
pay the consequence of that through the
quality of your decision-making. And
again, this is basically an expected
value thing. You may get lucky. You may
be able to ignore that and make a
certain decision and you get lucky with
that decision one or two times. But if
you continuously make decisions and
solve problems in that way, ignoring the
complexity and oversimplifying things,
your luck will eventually run out. And
especially if the decisions you're
making are important and costly, it only
takes two or three times of getting a
negative result to undo all the
positives that you've stacked up
previously. It is much faster and
cheaper to get feedback on how good your
decision is likely to be by doing this
activity and seeing how much you
struggle. If you struggle with mapping
things out and seeing how it all fits
together, it means it's not organized in
your brain. It means you don't really
understand how it all connects. If you
did really understand it, you would find
this easy to do. And when someone is
feeling overwhelmed with a decision,
overwhelmed with a problem, they're not
sure where to start. There are all these
different moving pieces. They all relate
to each other in complicated ways. They
don't know what to prioritize. They
don't know how to make that decision. I
can guarantee in every single one of
those instances, that person is going to
struggle to map things out. And when you
sit down and force yourself to address
that weakness head on, that is when you
start creating clarity of your
decision-making process, that is what
allows this complicated problem to be
broken down into simpler components. So
just remember, linear thinking is an
illusion. That's your brain looking for
a shortcut, probably not accurate.
Nonlinear relationships, that's the
truth. That's reality. If you struggle
thinking in terms of the reality, the
question that's left for you is are you
willing to either take the risk of being
wrong, which might be okay in some
situations, or would you rather do the
hard work of trying to organize it and
gain clarity. So that's the first meta
model, nonlinearity. And so you can see
what I mean is that any framework you
use, any mental model you use, when you
think about how am I going to apply my
context and my knowledge and my
situation to this mental model, you need
to be starting from a position where you
recognize the nonlinearity
of what's going on. Otherwise, the way
you use that mental model is going to be
wrong. And the next mental model is very
similar to this idea of nonlinearity. It
is the idea of gray thinking. When I
work with software engineers, especially
tech leads, one of the biggest problems
that they face is uh whether to move
fast or to maintain quality. So when you
move fast and you're pushing out new
features all the time, it increases the
error rate and there's lots of other
things and technical debt that builds
up. Whereas if you're trying to maintain
quality, it reduces your agility and it
means that you can't, you know, develop
new features as quickly and that could
impact the the overall business. And so
to resolve this, some mental models that
a senior software engineer might use
could be around the decision of should
we move fast or should we maintain
quality? And there are lots of
frameworks and mental models that they
might use to balance that decision. But
in actual fact, those models would be
incorrect. It would be wrong to use
those models because that's an example
of falling into the trap of black and
white thinking as opposed to gray
thinking. Black and white thinking is
saying that it's either A or B. That
these two things are polar opposites and
mutually exclusive of each other. And
just like how it's very rare for things
to have a onetoone linear relationship
like over here, it's very rare in real
life for things to be so black and
white. Most things are on a continuous
scale. And most of the best solutions
are in the gray area in between. By the
way, I know someone's going to comment
this. It's spelled G R A Y versus G R E
Y depending on which country you live
in. So going back to that software
example, you can move fast with good
deployment pipelines and QA processes
while maintaining quality. You can
strike a balance of both of those
things. And so you can see when you
start thinking in terms of the gray, it
means that other types of mental models
may be more suitable. The problem is not
should we maintain quality versus should
we go fast. It is understanding what
parts of going fast lead to the
reductions in quality. How can we
maintain quality in a lean agile way
without sacrificing speed? What are some
models of thinking that allow us to
increase speed and increase quality? And
the reason we are biased towards black
and white thinking by default is very
similar reason to why we're biased
towards linear thinking by default as
well is that it's a cognitive shortcut.
In fact, not just a cognitive shortcut,
a cognitive emotional shortcut. It is
much simpler. It's much easier. It's
much less overwhelming to assume and
say, "Hey, this really complicated thing
with all these different factors that
come together, it's a onetoone linear
relationship." Likewise, it's the same
thing to say, "Hey, this really
complicated decision, it's easier to say
it's either A or it's either B." It
simplifies our decision. It creates an
illusion of simplicity, but it does so
using what's in in in logic and
reasoning studying uh is called a false
dichotomy.
A dichotomy is when we see things as as
two different things. And a false
dichotomy is saying we've basically
split aside uh two different factors as
being mutually exclusive from each other
when actually they don't have to be. And
so the takeaway for this
is in a similar way, catch yourself on
black and white thinking.
And the best part about this is that you
don't actually have to understand the
gray first. It's enough to recognize the
red flag of something being very black
and white. And the best example that I
can think of off the top of my head is
actually uh a conversation pretty
recently that I had with our very own
YouTube strategist Anv uh who's actually
going to be reviewing this video. So,
hey, Anv. And I remember a conversation
where we're talking about uh different
things in terms of uh creating content
and and there's lots of different
nuances in terms of creating content and
educating at scale. And we were talking
about this problem of how do you create
content that really resonates with
people that they can relate to when
people are so diverse, they come from so
many different backgrounds. Do we create
content that is broadly resonant with
many people but is pretty superficial or
do we create content that is deep and
nuanced but it only resonates with a a
small percentage of the population and
what he said at the time was I don't
know the right way to think about this
but I recognize that the way that I'm
seeing this is very black and white
which is usually not true for anything I
really understand properly. So it
probably means that I need to think
about this more. And I think that is a
perfect example of catching yourself on
black and white thinking and going
towards the gray. And you can probably
feel this yourself is that when you
think about stuff that you really know a
lot about, there are not that many black
and white statements that you would be
able to make about it. And so if there
are things that you're tackling,
problems and decisions that you have to
make at work that the way you're
thinking about it, you may feel very
confident. But if the way you're
thinking about it is also quite black
and white, then for me that is always uh
a warning sign. That's always a red
flag. It doesn't mean you're wrong, but
you should explore it. And when you're
in that situation and when you realize,
hey, I might be doing some black and
white thinking. The second takeaway is
actually just to do more of this.
Engaging in nonlinearity
helps you to identify different factors
and variables that you might have been
missing before and show you where a gray
solution might exist. Now, at this
point, if you've been listening
attentively, the question that's
probably in your head right now is this
is all really useful so far, and I'm
finding this really insightful. I wish
I'd known this sooner.
Why didn't I know this sooner? And in my
experience, nine out of 10 times, the
reason that you didn't know this is
because you're not signed up to my
newsletter. For those of you that don't
know, I have a free weekly newsletter
that I send out. I write them myself
where I think about all the different
models, the meta models, the insights,
the principles that I think would really
help you learn more efficiently and also
manage yourself more efficiently. All
the things that you need to be a
well-rounded, effective professional.
These are things that I've distilled
from my years of working with so many
people. And each of these newsletters
could probably be its own YouTube video.
So, if you found this video useful so
far, then I'm sure you're also going to
love my newsletter. Again, it's totally
free. It takes a few minutes to read. If
you're interested in signing up, I'll
leave a link to that in the description
below. Now, the third meta model is
what I call AAM's bias. Now, there's
this thing which you may have heard of
called AAM's razor. I first learned
about this in medicine. Okam's razor
says that the simplest explanation is
probably the right one. So, if someone
comes in and they've got all these
different types of symptoms, like
they've got a headache and they've got a
fever and they've got a cough and they
were sick before and they've got this
rash all over their body and they're
finding it hard to breathe. It's more
likely that there's one disease with all
of these symptoms rather than like five
different diseases occurring
simultaneously. It's named after William
of Okam who was this 14th century
philosopher and it's called Okam's razor
uh because the term razor apart from
meaning like a blade in logic refers to
a tool which cuts away unnecessary
possibilities to make decisions easier.
So another razor is called Alder's razor
uh which is also called Newton's flaming
laser sword which states that if
something cannot be settled through
experimentation and observation then
it's not worth debating. It basically
means that this is going to be a a
futile endless debate that no one can
really prove. And so AAM's razor is
really good because it forces you to be
consilient in the way that you look at
evidence. It means that if there's lots
of different factors that are popping
up, don't just say, "Hey, there's lots
of individual things." It kind of forces
a level of nonlinearity,
which is a good thing. And it says,
"Find the underlying cause that ties all
of it together." You're sort of like a
detective doing like a murder mystery
with all the like the crazy photos and
the string corkboard thing going on the
wall. But I'm not talking about AAM's
razor. I'm talking about AAM's bias. I
call it Okam's bias because this is what
I see happening when people use Okam's
razor too aggressively. And the issue I
see is people doing over attribution
where they see all these different
symptoms and then they force it to fit a
single cause because that's the simplest
explanation. And so this can actually be
really dangerous because it may not be
all caused by the same thing. For
example, when I was working in the
emergency department, people come in for
heartburn, stomach pain all the time,
like every single day, dozens of people.
And when you're assessing someone that's
coming in for like heartburn or stomach
pain or something like that, you always
have to be careful of diagnosing all of
that as gastritis or reflux because what
it could also be is a heart attack. Pain
occurring here is not so far from pain
occurring here. And every doctor has
heard horror stories of having a patient
assessing them as having just like a
pretty benign, you know, acid reflux or
heartburn issue, but then it turned out
to be an underlying, you know, heart
problem. But the thing is that there is
a temptation to just say, "Yes, this is
just heartburn. It's just acid in your
stomach. Nothing to worry about."
Because working someone up and and
investigating them and treating them for
a heart problem is much more
complicated. It requires a lot more
work. And when you're a busy doctor
working in emergency, you've already got
endless amounts of work. You want to
make life easier for yourself. And it's
the same thing outside of the emergency
department. In any profession, you don't
want to give yourself more work by
turning something that could be simple
into something that is unnecessarily
complicated. But we have to understand
the risk that oversimplifying could lead
to error in medicine. Actually, this is
such a big problem that not only is this
issue like drilled into us constantly
during medical school and in our
training to make sure we don't make this
mistake and we still make this mistake,
it's actually got its own term which is
called Hickham's dictim which basically
came around in medicine to counter AAM's
razor. While Okam's razor says that the
simplest explanation for all these
symptoms is probably the most accurate,
Hickham's dictim says verbatim, patients
can have as many diseases as they damn
well please. It states that reality
doesn't owe it to you to be simple. How
easy or difficult it is for you to
understand doesn't matter. And so here's
the takeaway for you to avoid
AAM's bias is first of all be aware of
the cost of simplification.
Whenever you're simplifying an issue and
there's lots of different components and
you're trying to find, you know, one way
to attribute all of those things to
progress on your problem or your
decision, remember that any step of
simplification increases the risk of
some kind of error. you're losing some
level of detail every time you simplify.
Sometimes those details don't matter.
It's just noise that's preventing you
from making a good decision. But
sometimes those details are crucial.
What's important is not to just say
don't simplify ever because that's going
to slow down your your pace of execution
too much. Simplification is a cognitive
shortcut and cognitive shortcuts are not
always a bad thing. What's important is
to recognize the cost of that shortcut.
What risk are you now exposing yourself
to by having simplified it in a certain
way? Which factors are you choosing to
remove? And again, if you haven't done
this nonlinearity piece, it becomes
really hard to do this because you're
not even aware of what you're losing.
All you're doing is you're taking what
is a vague sense of overwhelm and you're
turning that into something that feels
simple. You have no concept of the risk
you're exposing yourself to. And this
ties into the the second part, which is
when you are simplifying something,
be mindful. Are you simplifying it
because you just you're lazy or you just
can't be bothered? Or are you
simplifying things to reduce the amount
of noise? Simplifying things to reduce
the amount of noise and make a better
decision is a good thing. Simplifying
because you just can't be bothered or it
takes too long or it's just too hard to
think about how it all connects together
is not useful. You can get to a point
where you see how everything comes
together and you know what's important
and how these different factors
influence each other and make the
educated decision to remove some of
those variables because you don't think
it's going to be important and now you
create a simplified representation of
the problem that you can now put into
the appropriate mental model so that you
can work through that framework and come
to a decision or solve that problem. Now
that's very different to again that
feeling of overwhelm. This is very vague
concept that there are lots of things
going on and because I want to make it
simpler, I'm just going to only focus on
the parts that I immediately am aware of
and find intuitive which again reality
does not owe it to you to fit what you
think is intuitive. Now, when you do it
the first way and you see generally how
it connects together, you've done like
sort of this nonlinear map, you may
still be wrong. You may decide to cut
away factors that you don't think are
important and then you run your
experiment. you you get your data and
you find hey actually that was important
you it doesn't mean that you are
guaranteed to be in the the most optimal
place every single time but again it's
about the expected value there is a
higher probability that you're going to
mitigate huge risks there is a higher
probability that you're going to get the
result that you want when you make
decisions in this way and you approach
problems in this way consistently over
time you're more likely to win whereas
If every time you're faced with
something that feels overwhelming, your
response is to oversimplify it by just
cutting away everything else and not
thinking about it over time, you're
likely to lose. And I'll give you a
little pro tip for this one. And this
this can be your third takeaway is learn
to be okay with black boxes. Black boxes
are basically areas of uncertainty,
things that you don't really know how it
all works, how it all fits together. you
know that there's this sort of clump of
of concepts that relate to each other
and it's pretty complicated and you
don't really want to dive into it. Even
if you can't explore that, you might not
have enough time. It might be too
complicated. There is a big difference
between seeing the black box,
appreciating and recognizing that it's
there and then making a decision versus
ignoring the black box, not even knowing
which variables or factors you might be
missing. The difference is that when you
make your decision, when you solve the
problem and you get real world data and
feedback on how effective it was,
whether you got the actual result at the
end of the day, when you get this
feedback coming back to you, if you knew
that there is this black box part of the
process that you didn't quite figure
out, you can turn to that black box and
say, "Okay, maybe I need to dive into
that a little bit more. Maybe this part
that I thought wasn't important actually
is more important than I thought. So now
it's worth my time to explore that
because I need the result. Whereas if
you didn't even do that level of
thinking, you're not even aware of that
black box. You get this result that you
didn't expect that is not desirable and
then you don't know what to do with
that. You're not learning from that
experience. It prevents you from being
able to think and process failures and
data points in a productive way, which
significantly slows down how fast you're
able to iterate and learn from that
experience. So that's AAM's bias. See
reality for what it is. Don't simplify
things just to make it easier for
yourself and then expose yourself to to
tons of risk. Now, one of the most
common reasons that I see people
oversimplifying things in a way that is
inaccurate and not catching themselves
on the fact that this is an
oversimplification is this fourth meta
model, which is framing bias. I'm just
noticing that my S's just look like
backwards C's. But if you zoom in
enough, you can see that there's a
little squiggle there. So that's an S.
Anyway, I want you to remember this
statement. Just because it's logical
doesn't mean it's right. Information can
be organized. Problems and situations
can be categorized in any number of
different ways. And sometimes that way
that you categorize it is not only
logical, it's also practical and
effective. The issue, and this is what
framing bias is about, is that the way
you think about a problem or a situation
or a decision you need to make shouldn't
be restricted to the way that it was
presented to you, the way someone else
organizes something, the way someone
else categorizes something. If someone
presents something to you in a way
that's like here's A, then B, then C.
When you first consume that, it may feel
very logical to think about it in that
way, but you have to have the cognitive
flexibility to recognize that that may
not be the best way to think about it.
And in many situations when there is an
existing problem and lots of people are
thinking about it in a certain way and
finding it difficult, the way to break
through that problem is to frame that
problem differently. the ability to
break free of existing structures and
ways that people tend to think about
something and having that flexibility to
see things laid out and organized
differently creates immense value in the
professional world. This is what I was
saying at the very beginning is that the
difference between a great worker uh and
a great thinker versus someone who's
just average is not really about what
they know. At a certain point, everyone
knows enough. The difference is the
person that knows how to think about a
problem in a different way. So simply
put, framing bias is when
the way information is presented
to us
changes the way
so changes how we think about that
information. So if I say here's a
problem, here's a situation. It's
basically A and B and we need to get to
C. And so you say, okay, there's A,
there's B and we need to get to C. Cool.
And if that's the only way you think
about this problem, you are likely to
run into framing bias because perhaps
actually the true solution is to say,
well, hold on. You've said that it's A
and B. But to me, A and B actually sound
like the same thing. And it feels like
there's something else that leads to C,
which is this other thing, D. So, isn't
it perhaps A plus B being one thing with
D leading to C? Isn't this the right way
to think about it? And the situation I
see this all the time, the most common
by far are technical disciplines where
there's usually lots of different
information and there are existing
frameworks and models on how to think
about things. And these frameworks and
models tend to be very utilitarian.
They're very practical. They allow you
to have these cognitive shortcuts that
you need to use every single day. So
these existing frameworks exist exist to
speed things up. So in medicine a really
common framework that people think about
all diseases through is what's the
history? What do people say when they
come in as a patient? What are the signs
and the symptoms? What are the
investigations like the blood tests and
the the x-rays and the CTS that you can
do? What would you find there? And then
what is your treatment? Sometimes you
divide that treatment into what do you
do acutely right now versus what do you
do chronically. 90% of every single
disease can be categorized through that
framework and 90% of the time when
you're learning these diseases you're
learning it through that flow. The same
thing is is common with uh software
engineering where there's an existing
software development life cycle. There
are existing frameworks. So when people
think about problems with software, they
think about it through this framework of
the software development life cycle. But
the thing we have to recognize is that
if there's a specific problem you're
solving or decision that you need to
make that's particularly complicated,
it's not likely that that framework that
exists and you're familiar with is
created with this type of problem
solving or decision-m in mind. This was
created for an entirely different
purpose. And so if the way you're
thinking about this problem is using
this method of thinking, there's going
to be misalignment and it's going to be
really hard for you to do the
nonlinearity and seeing the reality for
what it is when you're locked into
seeing it through a different pattern.
It's going to feel very forced like it
doesn't quite all connect together. And
again, reality is your benchmark.
Reality tells you the truth. If you're
thinking about a problem in a certain
way and it doesn't fit, the issue is the
way that you're thinking about it.
That's the part that needs to change.
You can't manipulate reality in order to
make it fit the way that you need it to.
And so this is crucial because the way
that you think about a problem or a
situation is 90% of the battle. A lot of
time is wasted and lost on just trying
to figure out the right way to break
down a complicated situation. And a lot
of mistakes come from not having thought
about it in the right way to begin with.
applying the wrong mental model or
applying a mental model and missing some
of those factors. Again, it's not the
lack of a mental model. It's the lack of
the meta model that teaches you how to
use the right model in the right way.
And a really famous example of uh people
overcoming the framing bias, allowing
them to switch mental models and create
enormous value is actually in Toyota. So
if you weren't aware in the ' 50s and60s
Toyota started really making a name for
themselves in really highquality
efficient production line like
manufacturing. There are a lot of
quality control and efficiency practices
used in all sorts of industries around
the world today that originated from
Toyota in the ' 50s60s and 70s. And one
famous example is the Toyota Anden cord
system. Back in the 50s, the prevailing
assumption, the frame that people were
taught about manufacturing is that
efficiency is keeping that production
line moving as much as possible.
Anything that stops the production line
creates inefficiency. And so a lot of
the models around increasing efficiency
were how do you log and document
failures and inconsistencies in your
production line so you can go back and
fix it? How do you make the logging
faster for the workers? How do you make
it more accurate? How do you uh you know
bring people in to diagnose what the
issues are and then when do you take
time to improve those processes and
repair them? And so what Toyota did
differently is that they broke out of
that framing bias and they said well
what if efficiency doesn't come from
never stopping the production line. What
if efficiency comes from constantly
learning? And they did the exact
opposite. They gave workers the ability
at any point for any worker to pull the
and cord which stops the entire
production line. As soon as a worker on
the ground level saw an issue, they
would pull the cord. The supervisors
would come in, the technicians would
come in, they diagnose the issue. They
they had improved the process
immediately. And as a result, their
production process was able to increase
in efficiency much more quickly and
iteratively than than the traditional
manufacturing model. In fact, this
principle ended up becoming one of the
core pillars of the lean manufacturing
revolution of the 80s that a lot of
manufacturers in the western worlds
would start studying to improve their
own processes. And so that all comes
from being able to escape this framing
bias. So here's a takeaway for you for
this, which is to actively
reframe.
There's always more than one way to see
a situation. If you can only think of
one way where it makes sense and it
intuitively fits in, you're definitely
missing a perspective. There's always a
different way to see it. So your job is
to find that way. Now it doesn't mean
that the other way of looking at it is
better. But it is faster and cheaper to
go through the thought process, figure
out those other ways of thinking about
it and evaluate which perspective, which
frame of thinking about this problem is
the most productive for me, rather than
taking the easy way out and saying,
"Well, it makes sense the way that it
was presented to me. It feels logical,
so I'm just going to stick with this."
And then potentially missing the real
game-changing perspective. And I'm
saying actively reframe because it is an
active process. You when when someone
presents something to you in a way
unless it already is like really
disorganized and you have no idea where
to start. If it's presented to you in a
way that's like here's how you should
think about this problem A, B, and C and
it feels logical and it feels intuitive.
You're not going to feel the need to
reframe that problem. You're not going
to feel the need to challenge yourself.
It feels like unnecessary extra work
that you're giving. But when you get
into the habit of constantly trying to
reframe the information and seeing
different ways that it comes together,
this process not only is valuable and
deepening your thought and helping you
arrive at innovative really highquality
solutions and decisions, but also that
process starts getting easier for you.
So it's not all this extra work. It
might be at the beginning, but once you
get used to it, it's as easy as just
thinking about anything else. And in
short, what that means is that by
getting used to these meta models of
thinking, you are getting used to being
excellent, which is kind of the point of
the next meta model, which is the
anti-comfort
model. There's this other great book
called anti-fragile
by the legendary Nim Nicholas Taleb. And
what he talks about is this idea of
systems and processes that are fragile.
So that means that when things change,
they get worse. And then he talks about
systems that are resilient. Supposedly
the opposite of fragile. So when
something is resilient, when things
change, it doesn't get worse. It's able
to withstand that change. But then he
talks about the idea of something that's
anti-fragile,
which is something that when things
change, it gets better. The thing that
creates instability and concern for
fragile systems and the thing that puts
pressure on resilient systems, an
anti-fragile system thrives from it. And
this is the same idea with anti-comfort.
When something is comfortable, it means
that we're used to it. We're familiar
with it. It's easy for us to think in a
way that's comfortable. If there's a
problem that we have at work, if there's
a complex situation or a decision that
we need to make and we're thinking about
it in a way that feels comfortable for
us, what it means at a cognitive level
is that we're using patterns of thinking
that we're used to. We're relying on
existing habits and patterns of problem
solving and organizing information that
we have experience with. Now, if someone
is uncomfortable with a problem or a
situation, they're feeling overwhelmed.
They're seeing all of these different
factors and then they're feeling there's
too much. I I don't know what to do with
all of this information. They want to
retreat away. An anti-comfort
mindset. This meta model is talking
about actively looking for ways to make
yourself feel less comfortable. It's
going from feeling familiar with the
patterns of thinking, having a way of
approaching a problem or a decision that
you feel pretty comfortable with, and
then actively looking for reasons why
you're wrong. The idea is that you are
wary, you're cautious of that feeling of
comfort because it means that there
could be a blind spot that you're
unaware of. I guess that's what a blind
spot is. And so in short, we can say
that an anti-comfort approach means that
you are looking for
your gaps.
You're asking yourself, "What have I
missed?
What could make me
wrong?"
You want to feel a little uncomfortable
when you're too comfortable. And this is
hard to do because it there's there's
emotion tied into it. You don't want to
give yourself more work like we talked
about. But an anti-comfort mentality
means that you are more committed to
getting the result that you want than
how you feel about the process of
getting to this result. You're willing
to accept discomfort in exchange for a
better result. And so the takeaway to
this is is is really simple
because the takeaway to this one is just
do all this stuff. Do all of this. Use
these other models. Trying to use these
meta models whenever you're working
through a framework and thinking about a
problem is uncomfortable and it's going
to make you look at that feeling of
overwhelm and say, "Hey, what are you
why am I overwhelmed? What is it that I
do not know that is making me feel like
the pieces don't fit together?" And so
merely the commitment to apply these
meta models means that you are taking an
anti-comfort approach. And to anchor
this in in terms of why it's so worth it
to do this is actually the final meta
model which is the model of delayed
discomfort.
There's this concept I talk about a lot
called desirable discomfort. It's saying
that just because something is
uncomfortable doesn't mean that that is
a bad thing. Whether something is bad or
not is your interpretation of that
feeling. But discomfort is just a
sensation like the the breeze against
your skin or you know smelling some kind
of food. It's just a sensation that
you're noticing. When we tell ourselves
this is a bad thing, that can sometimes
be a barrier to growth and improvement.
When we're engaging in a hobby or a fun
activity that is that's mentally or
physically challenging that is creating
discomfort, but we we interpret that as
being fun and worthwhile. And sometimes
there are things that are worthwhile
that create discomfort that we interpret
as being bad. Learning is a great one
where there's lots of studies that have
been done around how people
self-regulate their learning strategies
which has found that when learning and
using a certain strategy feels difficult
and feels like it involves more mental
work and thinking, people think that
that means that this strategy is not
effective and so they stop using it. But
actually what's clear is that the most
effective learning strategies force you
to think more deeply. And so in that
case that is desirable difficulty. You
actually want your brain to be thinking
more deeply because that produces a
better result. Now an issue with the way
that I've seen a lot of people interpret
this idea of desirable difficulty is
that they will have a certain task that
they need to do and this this task uh
may have a way of doing this. Like for
example, if it is learning about
something, there is a a strategy that
you can use and a method and a way to go
about learning uh which I teach in all
my other videos that could be difficult.
It could induce a level of difficulty or
I could do it in the way that I'm used
to doing which is potentially
comfortable. It's much easier. I know
how to do that. And so this is not
difficult.
And so the the the issue here is that
they're making this decision about
saying, "Okay, this one is actually the
one that I feel like doing because it's
easier and this one is the one that is
harder for me to do." But I'm telling
myself, this is the one that is actually
desirable. This is the one that I should
do. And so now you're torn between what
you know you should do versus what you
kind of feel more drawn towards, which
is the easier option. And if on a bad
day when you just don't have enough
time, when you don't have the willpower,
you just resort to the easier option.
But this is not the full picture. And
this is the part that I want to
communicate really clearly here is that
this is only the first part of that
decision. Because often if it's
desirable difficulty, when you pick the
path that involves lower levels of
difficulty, it's also going to lead to a
lower level of result as opposed to if
you pick the path with the desirable
difficulty, which leads more closely to
the result that you actually wanted in
the first place. And when you have the
lower level of result,
this result also has consequences.
And now you need to manage these
consequences. So that's extra work you
need to do. That's extra effort. That is
extra time that you need to spend. And
all of this this is also difficult. And
sometimes the consequences of not
getting the result that you want adds an
extra layer which is that it is
emotionally
difficult.
And so the decision that you're making
at this point when you're deciding how
should I go about this task is not
desirable difficulty versus ease. The
true decision we're making is do I pick
the path of desirable discomfort which
is this one or do I pick the path of
delayed discomfort
which is this one. So the discomfort is
there regardless. It's just do you pay
that upfront or do you pay that later?
And most of the time it's better to pay
that upfront because the level of
discomfort is easier to plan for
upfront. Whereas if you have delayed
discomfort, you don't know what the
consequences of that is going to be. You
don't know how much discomfort there's
going to be. It's harder to assess what
the cost you're paying in those
consequences and getting the bad result
actually means. And the future version
of you has other things to do than pay
off this discomfort, debt, and the
consequences of getting the poor result.
In learning, I see this all the time
where people pick the easiest, most
passive way to learn something. They're
covering 100 pages of content in half an
hour. They write up a beautiful set of
notes that 90% AI generated. And then
the future version of them is now stuck
with 3 4 hours a day where they need to
go through the stuff to keep on top of
it or they'll come back to it 2 weeks
later and they've forgotten everything.
you've now created a problem for the
future version of yourself. And that's
where people get stuck on this
overwhelming just hamster wheel of
constantly working and constantly trying
to catch up. The thing you're trying to
catch up to is not your present
challenges. The things that you're
trying to catch up to is the challenges
that the past version of you made for
you today. And so the takeaway for you
is this.
Sometimes delayed discomfort is okay.
Sometimes delayed discomfort is actually
just strategic. You can make that
decision. Just make that decision
intentionally.
Intentionally decide whether you want
the discomfort
now or
later. If you need to make a decision
about something, if you need to solve a
problem and you need to do it by the end
of today, you maybe don't have time to
go through all of this stuff. And so you
may be willing to accept the risk that
you're going to pay for that discomfort
later if the result you get isn't good
enough. And you can hope that it is good
enough. You can use the mental model
that you think is the best one for you
based on your limited understanding of
the issue and just hope you get the
result right now while understanding
that that's probably not the best way to
go about solving problems and making
decisions long term. But just make that
decision consciously. And when you
decide that you are going to take this
difficulty up front, hold yourself
to a high standard.
If you're going to take on a level of
discomfort, do it right. At least don't
shortcut yourself. When I'm doing a
coaching consultation with someone and
I'm sitting there watching how they
apply a certain learning strategy or a
learning technique and they've been
struggling with it for for weeks or even
months, one of the most effective things
that I do that allows a transformation
to occur in that person in one hour that
they previously weren't able to do in 6
months before that is simply being clear
about the standard they need to hold
themselves to and not letting them get
away with it. when they see a problem
and they say, "Okay, well, I'm seeing
this problem in this kind of way." And I
say, "Well, what's another way that you
could think about this? What's another
way you could perceive the situation?
What's another way you could group and
categorize and connect it into a big
picture?" And they say, "I'm not really
sure. I don't let them get away with I
don't know." I encourage them to just
try their best. Just try to find another
way. when they're looking at all these
different parts that connect together
and they're getting overwhelmed and they
say, "I don't know how it connects
together." All I say is, "Well, just try
to connect it. Just see where you get
to. Yes, it's overwhelming. Yes, it's
complicated. That's the reason it's a
problem in the first place. That's the
reason it is your job to solve this. So,
just try." And honestly, 70% of the time
when someone has an issue, that is the
difference that allows them to make the
light bulb click. That's the point where
they realize, oh, this is what it feels
like to think at this level. That's when
they realize, oh, it's actually not as
scary as I thought, not as bad as I
thought to hold myself to this standard.
And then from that point, it gets easier
and easier. And I know that when
someone's able to experience what it's
like to think at that level, just even
once, then we're winning. From that
point, everything is easier because they
know that they can do it, they can hold
themselves to a certain standard, and
they can hit that standard. And as they
repeatedly hit that standard again and
again, it gets easier and easier and
easier to do it. So these are the six
meta models that you should apply
anytime that you're using any other type
of framework or mental model. If you
found this video useful, please share it
with a colleague or a friend. And if
you're interested in leveling up the way
that you think and improving your
skills, you're going to need to make
sure that you're spending your time
effectively. And one of the biggest time
waste that I see is how people spend
their evenings coming home after work.
So, if you're interested in some
strategies on how you can reclaim your
evenings, then check out this video here
where I talk about that very topic.
Thank you so much for watching and I'll
see you in the next one.